about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

I've worked with lots of great organisations including [BBC Young Reporter](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-46131593), [Catch22](https://www.catch-22.org.uk/), [Deparment for Education](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education), [Diabetes UK](https://www.diabetes.org.uk/), [European Commission](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/index_en), [General Assembly](https://generalassemb.ly/), [Google.org](https://www.google.org/), [Inside Job Productions](https://www.insidejobproductions.co.uk/), [Mind Of My Own](https://mindofmyown.org.uk/), [Ministry of Justice](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ministry-of-justice), [New Philanthropy Capital](https://www.thinknpc.org/), [Young Dads Collective](https://www.familyandchildcaretrust.org/young-dads-collective). 

## Publications

- [How we’re developing the product leaders of the future](https://digitalpeople.blog.gov.uk/2019/04/15/how-were-developing-the-product-leaders-of-the-future/) - 15/4/2019, Government Digital Service blog (co-author)
- [Let’s Resolve to Create Humane Products in 2019](https://www.mindtheproduct.com/2019/01/lets-resolve-to-create-humane-products-in-2019/) - 2/1/2019, Mind the Product blog (author)
- [The Product Management Handbook for Government](https://mojdigital.blog.gov.uk/2018/12/07/the-product-management-handbook-for-government/) - 7/12/2018, MOJ Digital & Technology blog (author)
- [Product Roadmaps in Five Easy Pieces](https://www.mindtheproduct.com/2018/09/product-roadmaps-in-five-easy-pieces/) - 5/9/2018, Mind the Product blog (author)
- [28 Expert Opinions On User-Centred Product Management](https://www.userzoom.com/blog/28-expert-opinions-on-user-centred-product-management/) - 14/8/2018, UserZoom blog (contributor)
- [Make the most of your roadmap](https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2017/08/03/make-the-most-of-your-roadmap/) - 3/8/2017, Government Digital Service blog (author)
- [Everything you ever wanted to know about the cloud and platforms but were afraid to ask](https://mojdigital.blog.gov.uk/2016/03/22/everything-you-ever-wanted-to-know-about-the-cloud-and-platforms-but-were-afraid-to-ask/) - 22/3/2016, MOJ Digital & Technology blog (author)
- [Empathy and digital transformation](https://www.thinknpc.org/blog/empathy-and-digital-transformation/) - 31/7/2015, New Philanthropy Capital (author)
- [Young Dads TV: digital voices of young fathers](https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/tpp/frs/2015/00000004/00000002/art00016) - July 2015, Families, Relationships and Societies, Volume 4, Number 2 (co-author) 
- [Fully Committed? How government could reverse family breakdown](https://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/library/fully-committed-government-reverse-family-breakdown) - 13/7/2014, Centre for Social Justice (contributor)
- [Fractured Families: Why stability matters](https://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/library/fractured-families-stability-matters) - 14/6/2013, Centre for Social Justice (contributor)
- [The Potential of Digital Games for Empowerment and Social Inclusion of Groups at Risk of Social and Economic Exclusion: Evidence and Opportunity for Policy](https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/eur-scientific-and-technical-research-reports/potential-digital-games-empowerment-and-social-inclusion-groups-risk-social-and-economic) - 2013, European Commission (contributor)
- [Are we nearly there yet, Dad?](http://www.barnardos.org.uk/what_we_do/policy_research_unit/research_and_publications/are-we-nearly-there-yet-dad/publication-view.jsp?pid=PUB-1900) - December 2012, Barnardos (contributor)
- [The breadth and scope of computergames in learning](http://www.academia.edu/359010/The_breadth_and_scope_of_computer_games_in_learning_Applications_to_14_to_19_learners_with_a_specific_focus_on_applicability_to_those_who_are_classified_as_Not_in_Employment_Education_or_Training_NEET_) - 2010, University of Wolverhampton (co-author)

Commit message:

what is product at moj
Added link to what is product at moj

about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

I've worked with lots of great organisations including [BBC Young Reporter](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-46131593), [Catch22](https://www.catch-22.org.uk/), [Deparment for Education](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education), [Diabetes UK](https://www.diabetes.org.uk/), [European Commission](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/index_en), [General Assembly](https://generalassemb.ly/), [Google.org](https://www.google.org/), [Inside Job Productions](https://www.insidejobproductions.co.uk/), [Mind Of My Own](https://mindofmyown.org.uk/), [Ministry of Justice](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ministry-of-justice), [New Philanthropy Capital](https://www.thinknpc.org/), [Young Dads Collective](https://www.familyandchildcaretrust.org/young-dads-collective). 

## Publications

- [What is Product Management at the Ministry of Justice?](https://mojdigital.blog.gov.uk/2019/10/03/what-is-product-management-at-the-moj/) - 3/10/2019, Ministry of Justice blog (author)
- [How we’re developing the product leaders of the future](https://digitalpeople.blog.gov.uk/2019/04/15/how-were-developing-the-product-leaders-of-the-future/) - 15/4/2019, Government Digital Service blog (co-author)
- [Let’s Resolve to Create Humane Products in 2019](https://www.mindtheproduct.com/2019/01/lets-resolve-to-create-humane-products-in-2019/) - 2/1/2019, Mind the Product blog (author)
- [The Product Management Handbook for Government](https://mojdigital.blog.gov.uk/2018/12/07/the-product-management-handbook-for-government/) - 7/12/2018, MOJ Digital & Technology blog (author)
- [Product Roadmaps in Five Easy Pieces](https://www.mindtheproduct.com/2018/09/product-roadmaps-in-five-easy-pieces/) - 5/9/2018, Mind the Product blog (author)
- [28 Expert Opinions On User-Centred Product Management](https://www.userzoom.com/blog/28-expert-opinions-on-user-centred-product-management/) - 14/8/2018, UserZoom blog (contributor)
- [Make the most of your roadmap](https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2017/08/03/make-the-most-of-your-roadmap/) - 3/8/2017, Government Digital Service blog (author)
- [Everything you ever wanted to know about the cloud and platforms but were afraid to ask](https://mojdigital.blog.gov.uk/2016/03/22/everything-you-ever-wanted-to-know-about-the-cloud-and-platforms-but-were-afraid-to-ask/) - 22/3/2016, MOJ Digital & Technology blog (author)
- [Empathy and digital transformation](https://www.thinknpc.org/blog/empathy-and-digital-transformation/) - 31/7/2015, New Philanthropy Capital (author)
- [Young Dads TV: digital voices of young fathers](https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/tpp/frs/2015/00000004/00000002/art00016) - July 2015, Families, Relationships and Societies, Volume 4, Number 2 (co-author) 
- [Fully Committed? How government could reverse family breakdown](https://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/library/fully-committed-government-reverse-family-breakdown) - 13/7/2014, Centre for Social Justice (contributor)
- [Fractured Families: Why stability matters](https://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/library/fractured-families-stability-matters) - 14/6/2013, Centre for Social Justice (contributor)
- [The Potential of Digital Games for Empowerment and Social Inclusion of Groups at Risk of Social and Economic Exclusion: Evidence and Opportunity for Policy](https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/eur-scientific-and-technical-research-reports/potential-digital-games-empowerment-and-social-inclusion-groups-risk-social-and-economic) - 2013, European Commission (contributor)
- [Are we nearly there yet, Dad?](http://www.barnardos.org.uk/what_we_do/policy_research_unit/research_and_publications/are-we-nearly-there-yet-dad/publication-view.jsp?pid=PUB-1900) - December 2012, Barnardos (contributor)
- [The breadth and scope of computergames in learning](http://www.academia.edu/359010/The_breadth_and_scope_of_computer_games_in_learning_Applications_to_14_to_19_learners_with_a_specific_focus_on_applicability_to_those_who_are_classified_as_Not_in_Employment_Education_or_Training_NEET_) - 2010, University of Wolverhampton (co-author)
