---
layout: post
title: "Strategy"
date: 2023-15-06
---

The science of strategy - it's a hypothesis - product way of working
Rests on hard-won knolwedge created through scientific empiricism. A strategy is a hypothesis and its implementation is an experiment.
Start small and start 'safe'.
Try to destroy your own ideas.

Does not come from strategic management model, tool, matrix, triangle. Does come from a talented leader identifying the one or two critical issues in a situation. 

Strip out ambition, leadership, vision, planning, competition. Discover the critical factors in a situation & find a way to coordinate & focus action to deal with those factors. These are all signs of bad strategy. Actively avoids obstacles. Mistakes goal setting for strategy. Spreads recources rather than focuses them. Having confilicting goals, dedicating recources to unconnected tagets and accomodating incompatible interests. Laundry list of desirable incomes. Absence of saying 'no'.
Cost of decentralisation is loss of coordination across units.
Bad strategy:
- fluff: gibberish. buzz words. masquerades as expertise.
- failure to face the challenge. if the challenge is not defined we can't assess the quality of the strategy
- mistakes goals for strategy
- bad strategic objectives that fail to address issues or are impractical
Bad strategy flourishes because it floats free of analysis, logic or choice.
Template style strategy
- transformational leader
- develops a vision
- inspires people to sacrifice for the good of the organisation
- empowers people to accomplish that vision.
- Vision: popular is 'to be the best' or 'be  the leading' or 'be the best known'
- Mission: fill a high-sounding, politically correct statement of your purpose
- Values: Fill in a statement describing your values. Make sure they are non-controversial.
- Strategy: Fill in some aspirations/goals but call them strategies.

Use 'goals' to express overall values and desires; 'objectives' to deonote specific operational targets

Good strategy involves focus and therefore choice.

A good strategy honestly acknowledges the challenges we face and provides an approach to overcome them.

My note: the opposite of chaos isn't order it's harmony 

Competitive advantage: rich - relatively few residents - AND - starting from scratch 

Doesn't urge us towards goals & visions, it acknowledges our problems & navigates around them
Roadmap - road MAP
Kernel:
Diagnosis
Policy/Theory
Coherent action: feasible policies, resource commitments and actions

In large organisations the challenge is often diagnosed as internal. The organisation's competitve problems may be much lighter than the obstacles imposed by its own outdated routines, bureaurocracy, pools of entrenched interest, lack of cooperation across units, and plain old bad management. Thus the guiding policy lies in the realm of reorganisation and renewal. And the set of actions are changes in people, power and process.
Inertia:
- routine: the pulse of the standard procedures for operating the organisation. simplify procedures. eliminate complex processes, routines and attempts to hide waste and inefficiency. strip out excess admin and halt nonessential operations
- by proxy: if our customers are slow to change then we're slow to change by proxy. Disappears when we decide that adapting to change is more important than hanging on to all our customers
Reduce cycle time - our products and services will be leading more often the shorter our cycle times are - and our performance gets better

Diagnosis - chain link logic - look for weakest link. there's no point strenghtening all of the links if a weak link remains.
Also - when each link in the chain is managed sepately the system can get stuck in low effectiveness. If you are the manager of one link in the chain there is no point investing resources in your link in the chain if others do not.

Guiding policyoutlines an overall approach. It channels action in certain directions without specifying exactly what shall be done. It's not a vision or a desired state, it's a method of grappling with a situation and ruling out an array of possible options.
Design is important. It's less about making a single decision and more about designing a set of complimentary policies. More construction than choice. Various elements must be aligned for strategy to work.There are gains to getting combinations right and costs to getting them wrong.
Competitive advantage in business is achieved when we can do something at lower cost or with more value or both.

Coherent action: resource deployments, policies and maneuvers, all coordinated. 

What has to happen for this dream to become reality?
Find our best opportunities - our biggest problems - opportunity solution tree

Competitive advantage versus suppliers
Better at Disco
Can influence org, e.g. standards 

Good strategy is scientific. It is a hypothesis. We need a safe space to test those hypotheses.

What's your actual goal? Let's write a list. What's top?

Good strategy requires good knowledge of the specifics. There's no substitute for on the ground experience.

Good strategy harnesses power and applies it where it will have the greatest effect.
It draws power from focusing minds, energy and action. The power of leverage. Need a pivot point to magnify the effects of focussed energy and resources. This is about application of power to the right target.
Create a proximate objective - one that is close at hand to be feasible. Name a target that we can expect to hit, even overwhelm.
Anticipate something to get ahead. Ride a wave of change.

Good strategy requires independent analysis and thought, not following the crowd. How do you remain indpendent without appearing eccentric? How do you doubt without becoming a curmudgeon? Social herding presses us to think that everything is OK (or not OK) because everyone else is saying so. The inside view presses us to ignore the lessons of other times and other places, believing that our company, our nation, our new venture, our era is different. It is important to push back against these biases. You can do this by paying attention to real world data abd by learning lessons taught from history.

Example: YDtv
Deficit model
excluded from policy and service design
turn weakness in to strength
Didn't try and improve them, connected them then let them do their own thing

Example: Cloud Platform
If you decentralise you lose coordination

If you rearrange a logic model you get a business model - the thing it adds is impact

For strategy article - being independent thinker - avoid being cumudgeonly - tenth man / third person

Gov.uk - commodity - is what it's becoming - that's a problem & an opportunity

Policy - is a method - like a recipe
Baking
